docs: improve the odigos architecture components page (#2232)
odigos-io/odigos: docs/architecture/components.mdx

### Component types:

- **Kubernetes Operators** - process changes in the cluster resources and deploy / configure the necessary components.
- **DaemonSets** - performs any node-level tasks, like when interacting with a process running on the node OS, accessing Kubelet, and reading logs from the node filesystem.
- **Deployments** - run Cluster level components like the OpenTelemetry collector, and the Odigos UI.

### Component Segments

Odigos is divided into three main segments:

- Instrumentation
  - inject OpenTelemetry agents to record / collect the instrumentation data from Odigos sources (instrumented applications),
  - record and report any instrumentation-relevant runtime information that is available in the process environment,
  - export the collected telemetry to the pipeline.

- Pipeline

>   - offload any common or heavy task from the instrumented application runtime,

Author: Maybe tasks is not the best word.

I was referring to thins like:
- Opening and maintaining a socket to remote machine (data-collection is localhost)
- aggressively batch the spans (it can build up and affect the memory consumption of the instrumented application)
- no need to handle back pressure - in case of back pressure, the node collector will queue the data in his memory, execute the retires, or drop it if there is too much pressure.
- modify attributes - instead of having the application runtime working hard and spending CPU and memory allocations, we offload that to processors in the pipeline.

We basically aim to do as little as possible in the application runtime (to decrease our footprint as much as possible in hot path), and do any possible operation in a different cold-path pods which will not harm the application

>   - apply any Odigos actions on the telemetry data to modify it according to user's needs,

Author: That makes sense

## Pipeline

> ### Auto Scaler (Pipeline Manager)

Author: Would love to rename it, the challenge is to map every relevant places. It's really easy to miss something when doing such a change and break odigos 😅 happened to me before

**Type**: Auto scaler is a Kubernetes operator

**K8s Resource**: `kubectl get deployments -n odigos-system odigos-autoscaler`

**Role**: The auto scaler component is responsible for managing the OpenTelemetry Collectors which implements the OpenTelemetry pipeline.

> - Start and stop collectors when needed (e.g. when sources or destinations are added or removed).

Author: When a user removes all destinations, we suppose to tear down the pipeline (thought I think it's not working at the moment but we should fix it).
When all sources are removed, we delete the node collector daemonset.

In the opposite - if there are no destinations and a new one is added, or no sources and a new one is added, the schedualer will bring them back up

- Schedule the node collector to start only after the cluster collector is ready.
- Generate the configuration for the collectors based on the Odigos sources, destinations, and action.

### Cluster Collector (Gateway Collector)

**Type**: Cluster collector is a deployment of the OpenTelemetry collector

**K8s Resource**: `kubectl get deployments -n odigos-system odigos-gateway`

**Role**: The cluster collector receives all the telemetry collected in the cluster, process it (to apply any actions), and export it to the configured destinations.

- Batch telemetry items for better performance, and export them reliably to the configured destinations (retries, backoff, etc).
- Modify the telemetry data based on the Odigos actions (add/remove/modify/rename attributes, etc).
- Apply tail sampling based on the Odigos Actions to reduce the volume of data sent to the destinations.

> - Collect metrics about the entities and report it to the UI for monitoring.

Author: mmm, yeah entities is a bad name, the metrics we are collecting is what we get from kubelet receiver (metrics about the containers,  node, and maybe other things)

> - Collect metrics about the entities and report it to the UI for monitoring.

Author: Yes it's the self observability capabilities (the UI meter that shows how much data we receive from each source and how much we send to each destination

> - Offload tasks from the agents, to reduce the overhead on the workload runtime environment

Author: yes, it's referring to "processors" doing some work instead of having the instrumented process runtime spending CPU and memory and affecting business performance.

**Type**: The node collector is a daemon set and will run one pod per node in the cluster

**K8s Resource**: `kubectl get daemonsets -n odigos-system odigos-data-collection`

> **Role**: The Node Collector (in the context of Pipeline component) receives telemetry data from agents running on the node, enriches it with node-level attributes, and forward it efficiently and reliably to the cluster collector.

Author: I splitted it to instrumentation (where the data is being generated) and pipeline (process and transmit).

In this context, the node collector does both, but I can see why it's not so clear, so maybe we can revisit this

> **Role**: The Node Collector (in the context of Pipeline component) receives telemetry data from agents running on the node, enriches it with node-level attributes, and forward it efficiently and reliably to the cluster collector.

Reviewer: I guess my question is, does this need to say `in the context of the pipeline component`, or is this accurate:

```
The Node Collector receives telemetry data from agents running on the node, enriches it with node-level attributes, and forwards it to the Cluster Collector.
```

in other words, does the node collector ever *not* receive telemetry data, enrich it, and forward it to the cluster collector?

> **Type**: The instrumentor is a Kubernetes operator

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Type**: Instrumentor is a Kubernetes operator
```

**K8s Resource**: `kubectl get deployments -n odigos-system odigos-instrumentor`

**Role**: The instrumentor is responsible for managing the auto instrumentation agents which collect the telemetry data from the Odigos sources.

> - Create and manage the `instrumentationconfig.odigos.io` objects

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Create and manage `instrumentationconfig.odigos.io` objects
```

>   - Triggers `odiglet` to inspect runtime information of the workload.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Trigger Odiglet to inspect runtime information of workloads.
```

>   - Triggers the scheduler to deploy the Odigos pipeline.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Trigger Scheduler to deploy the Odigos pipeline.
```

>   - Merge the Odigos instrumentation rules and odigos config to a workload scope configuration to be used by the agent.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Merge Odigos instrumentation rules and config to a workload scope configuration for the agent.
```

> - Inject the instrumentation device into the workload manifest resource as virtual device.

Reviewer: Do we have any docs on what an instrumentation device is?

Author: I don't think so, but since we are moving away from devices and will deprecate them in the near future, we can skip this IMO

Reviewer: sgtm

> - Monitor the `source.odigos.io` CRD and cleanup any instrumentation related resources when a source is removed.

Reviewer: 🚀 🚀 🚀

### Odiglet

**Type**: Odiglet is a daemon set and will run one pod per node in the cluster

**K8s Resource**: `kubectl get daemonsets -n odigos-system odiglet`

> **Role**: The odiglet component sets up the k8s node environment to run the telemetry-collection agents.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Role**: Odiglet sets up the node environment to run telemetry collection agents.
```

> - Inspect the runtime details of the instrumented sources containers (programming language, relevant env variables, runtime versions, etc).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Inspect container runtime details of instrumented sources (to determine programming language, relevant environment variables, runtime versions, etc).
```

> - Implement the Kubernetes virtual instrumentation devices. In the presence of a supported devices on the pod, odiglet will mount the agent code from fily-system to the pod, and add the relevant environment variables to initiate instrumentation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Implement the Kubernetes virtual instrumentation devices. In the presence of a supported device on the pod, Odiglet will mount the agent code from file system to the pod and add the relevant environment variables to initiate instrumentation.
```

is this "from file system" the host's file system, or the pod's?

Author: it will mount a directory from the host filesystem into the pod filesystem.

Example: https://github.com/odigos-io/odigos/blob/3cbb11747682f88fa24a7fa08c81ae3f56d59467/odiglet/pkg/instrumentation/instrumentlang/java.go#L58

> - For eBPF based instrumentation, odiglet will inject the eBPF code into the pod, pick up the telemetry items from the eBPF queues and push it downstream to node collector component.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- For eBPF-based instrumentation, Odiglet will inject the eBPF code into the pod, pick up telemetry from eBPF, and push it downstream to the Node Collector.
```

> - Monitor changes to instrumentations config, and apply to the relevant agents accordingly at runtime.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Monitor for config changes to instrumentations and update the relevant agents accordingly at runtime.
```

### Node Collector

> **Role**: Node collector (in the context of instrumentation) is responsible for scraping Kubernetes metrics, and collect logs from the node filesystem.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Role**: Node collector is responsible for scraping Kubernetes metrics, and collecting logs from the node filesystem.
```

is the Node collector ever not in the context of instrumentation?

Reviewer: I think same suggestion as above, we can drop the `(in the context of X)`. it's kind of confusing, and these page is about what each component does

> - When a destination for metrics exists, the node collector will use the OpenTelemetry-Collector ["kubeletstats receiver"](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/main/receiver/kubeletstatsreceiver) to scrape k8s related metrics from the kubelet and export them as otel metrics to the cluster collector.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- When a metrics destination exists, the node collector will use the OpenTelemetry Collector ["kubeletstats receiver"](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/main/receiver/kubeletstatsreceiver) to scrape k8s related metrics from the Kubelet and export them as OpenTelemetry metrics to the cluster collector.
```

> - When a destination for logs exists, the node collector will use the OpenTelemetry-Collector ["filelog receiver"](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/main/receiver/filelogreceiver) to read the relevant pod logs from the node filesystem and export them as otel logs to the cluster collector.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- When a logs destination exists, the node collector will use the OpenTelemetry Collector ["filelog receiver"](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/main/receiver/filelogreceiver) to read the relevant pod logs from the node filesystem and export them as OpenTelemetry logs to the cluster collector.
```

## Odigos

### Odigos UI

> **Type**: Odigos UI is a web application, it's backend is a deployment in the cluster, and the frontend runs in the user's browser.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Type**: Odigos UI is a web application backed by a deployment in the cluster and accessible by the user's browser.
```

**K8s Resource**: `kubectl get deployments -n odigos-system odigos-ui`

> **Role**: The Odigos UI is a web application that allows users to configure various aspects of the Odigos installation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Role**: The Odigos UI is a web application that allows users to configure the Odigos installation and pipeline.
```

I think "pipeline" here actually makes sense. "installation" tells me it's more for like system settings

Author: I depends what we call pipeline. are sources part of the pipeline? is intrumentation rules?

> - Serve as web server for the Odigos UI:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Serve as web server for the Odigos UI
```

>   - serves static files to the frontend,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Serve static files to the frontend
```

>   - provides a GraphQL API for the frontend, which in turn interacts with Kubernetes API to manage the Odigos installation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Provide a GraphQL API for the frontend, which in turn interacts with Kubernetes API to manage the Odigos installation.
```

- Provide a user interface for monitoring and managing the Odigos installation, including the sources, destinations, actions, and instrumentation rules.

> - Examine the current state of odigos, show any errors.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Examine the current state of Odigos and show any errors.
```

### Scheduler

**Type**: Scheduler is a Kubernetes operator

**K8s Resource**: `kubectl get deployments -n odigos-system odigos-scheduler`

**Role**: The scheduler is responsible for managing the Odigos installation itself.

> - Monitor the Odigos sources and destinations, to trigger the deployment of the Odigos pipeline.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Monitor the Odigos sources and destinations to trigger deployment of the Odigos pipeline.
```

> - Reconcile odigos configuration to run validations, set defaults, and apply ODigos profiles (configuration presets) to the cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Reconcile Odigos configuration to run validations, set defaults, and apply Odigos Profiles (configuration presets) to the cluster.
```
